SLEP019: Governance Update - Recognizing Contributions Beyond Code (version II) (#81)
scikit-learn/enhancement_proposals: slep019/proposal.rst

 SLEP019: Governance Update - Recognizing Contributions Beyond Code
####################################################################

> :Author: Julien Jerphanion <git@jjerphan.xyz>,
>          Gaël Varoquaux <gael.varoquaux@normalesup.org>

Reviewer: For a fairer authorship.
```suggestion
:Author: Chiara Marmo <marmochiaskl@gmail.com>,
         Julien Jerphanion <git@jjerphan.xyz>,
         Gaël Varoquaux <gael.varoquaux@normalesup.org>
```

Author: @jjerphan authorship is not only a matter of reconnaissance but also of responsibility.
The preference of the core-devs is going in a direction that does not represent my opinion: I'd rather not be listed among the authors. The commit history is enough to acknowledge my participation to the edition of the SLEP.
Hence I will not commit your suggestion. Thanks for your understanding.

> :Author: Julien Jerphanion <git@jjerphan.xyz>, Gaël Varoquaux <gael.varoquaux@normalesup.org>,
>          Chiara Marmo <marmochiaskl@gmail.com>

Reviewer: I think this is correctly parsed and reads better. What do you think?
```suggestion
:Author: Julien Jerphanion <git@jjerphan.xyz>,
         Gaël Varoquaux <gael.varoquaux@normalesup.org>,
         Chiara Marmo <marmochiaskl@gmail.com>
```

 Abstract
**********

> This SLEP proposes updating the Governance to broaden the notion of core
> contribution in scikit-learn.

Reviewer: "Core contributions" implies that there are "Non-core contributions" ; is this what we intend exactly? Don't we want to recognized all contributions, and hence all contributors, including "Core contributors" i.e. contributors that are notably involved in the project?
```suggestion
This SLEP proposes updating the Governance to broaden the notion of contribution in scikit-learn.
```

At this aim, the Technical Committee is renamed as Steering Committee, opening the
decision process to new to be defined core roles.
New core roles are allowed to be defined without requiring new SLEPs, to ease subsequent

> related changes to the Governance.

Reviewer: :100:

Reviewer 2: I think it would be good to describe what the process is going to be like. "By consensus" is an option, though tends to stall, "by lazy consensus" is also an option? I don't mind not having a SLEP, but I think the SLEP should give an alternative.

Author: This is clarified in https://github.com/scikit-learn/enhancement_proposals/blame/master/slep019/proposal.rst#L116

 Abstract
**********

This SLEP proposes updating the Governance to broaden the notion of contribution in scikit-learn.

> At this aim, the Technical Committee is renamed as Steering Committee, opening the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To this end, the Technical Committee is renamed to Steering Committee, opening the
```

> decision process to new to be defined core roles.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
decision process to new, to be defined, core roles.
```
Is this suggestion grammatically correct? I'm not entirely sure. Right now I find the sentence hard to parse.

Some of the proposed modification have been discussed in the monthly
meetings, on April 25th 2022 [5]_ and September 5th 2022 [6]_.

> The current version is based on the discussion on the draft version [7]_.  

Reviewer: I do not think this is necessary to have this mention in the final version of the SLEP, but we might want to references all the PRs used for iterating on writing this document.

What do you think?

Author: Yes, I would like to reference somewhere all the PRs, so people could see this is not a personal effort of the people listed as authors, but a mediation of all the ideas that came up during the discussion.

Author: I put both PRs in the ref. @jjerphan , let me know if you are ok with this formulation.

Reviewer: LGTM!

Define "Contributions" more broadly
===================================

Explicitly define Contributions and emphasize the importance of non-code
contributions in the Governance structure.

New roles and core roles, and susequent teams will be defined.
Core Team members will become scikit-learn "Core Contributors":
a Contributor will be promoted to a Core Contributor after being proposed by
at least one existing Core Contributor. The proposal must specify which

> Core Team the Contributor will be part of. The promotion will be effective

Reviewer: This mentions "Core Team". Should we first define what are Core Teams (and enumerate them)?

Author: As per https://github.com/scikit-learn/enhancement_proposals/pull/74#issuecomment-1310802614, let accept here the general principle of new core roles and define a simple way to create them.
Once this SLEP accepted it will be easier and straightforward to introduce those new roles.

Reviewer: This seems fair and reasonable to me.

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure I understand the distinction between Core "Team" vs Core "Role". Is the prior explicitly meant to refer to GitHub permissions?

Author: > Is the prior explicitly meant to refer to GitHub permissions?

Yes. Roles will exist even scikit-learn should migrate from github one day.
This is important when someone take a responsibility in the organization: github permissions should be set as this person could effectively do the job ... not the other way around... say people tasks modeled on github permissions.

after a vote on the private Core Contributor mailing list which must
last for two weeks and which must reach at least two-thirds positive
majority of the cast votes.

> A Core Contributor may belong to multiple core roles.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
A Core Contributor may belong to multiple core teams.
```
nitpick to keep the wording consistent with above where "core team" is used

Define the Steering Committee as a subset of Core Contributors rather
than a subset of Core Developers.

The Steering Committee shall consist of members from any of the core contributor teams,
and after this SLEP is accepted, the definition and formation of core teams such as

> the triage team and the communication team will go ahead.

Reviewer 5: ```
  - has a mandate of at maximum two years
```
I can't seem to suggest edits here.
```
  - has a mandate of maximum two consecutive terms
```

> the triage team and the communication team will go ahead.

Reviewer 5: I think a 2 year lifetime max is too restrictive, if that is what the current wording is implying.

> the triage team and the communication team will go ahead.

Reviewer 5: Some suggestions for organization of the Steering Council:
Have some folks with 1-year terms and others with 2-year terms.

Benefits:
- gives people flexibility on how long they want to serve
- we won't have all or majority of SC members going out at the same time
- easier for inactive SC members to exit

Considerations:
- there is the consideration that there is a limit of how many SC members can be from the same institution.

Turnover can be healthy for a volunteer leadership committee:  "has a mandate of maximum two consecutive terms". However, there is the issue that there may not be enough people to serve.

> the triage team and the communication team will go ahead.

Reviewer 6: It like to avoid to vote too often and to limit possible candidates too much. Python with [PEP0013](https://peps.python.org/pep-0013/) has a much more powerful SC, no term limit, but a vote after each feature release, i.e. once per year. Every SC member can leave anytime.
Concerning terms, I could imagine something similar.

> the triage team and the communication team will go ahead.

Reviewer 7: I think the words above are unclear, but the idea of explicit rather than implicit renewal makes the structure of the committee better reflect the variable nature of participation in the project. I hope that renewal will not be an opportunity to vote people out, but rather an opportunity for people to stand aside or discuss doing so.

> the triage team and the communication team will go ahead.

Reviewer: @jnothman: Thanks for your comment. I do not know what you are referring to with this remark:

> I think the words above are unclear.

Can you suggest a rewording of the parts which aren't clear to you? Thanks!

Define the Steering Committee as a subset of Core Contributors rather
than a subset of Core Developers.

The current members of the Technical Committee [8]_ will ensure the transition for a
two-years period, starting from the acceptance of this SLEP.
During the transition period roles which qualified as "Core Contributors" are expected to

> be represented in the Steering Committee by al least one member.

Author: Perhaps more details are necessary here?

Reviewer: I think so. Probably we should give a grasp about eventual roles in this SLEP without have them be exhaustively defined. What do you think?

Also, here are just some minor rephrasing suggestions:
```suggestion
The current members of the Technical Committee [8]_ will ensure the transition
for a two-years period, starting from the acceptance of this SLEP.
During the transition period, each role among "Core Contributors" is expected
to be represented in the Steering Committee by at least one member having this
role.
```

Author: > Probably we should give a grasp about eventual roles in this SLEP without have them be exhaustively defined. What do you think?

See https://github.com/scikit-learn/enhancement_proposals/pull/74#issuecomment-1310802614

I was referring to details about the nomination/election of new members.

Define the Steering Committee as a subset of Core Contributors rather
than a subset of Core Developers.

The current members of the Technical Committee [8]_ will ensure the transition

> for a two-years period, starting from the acceptance of this SLEP.

Reviewer 4: Why two years? Is it a starting point to be discussed or is there some thinking behind why two is a good number?

My worry and experience with other governance changes/refactors/restructuring is that "work expands to take the time allocated to it". For me four weeks is (obviously) too short, and equally two years is (obviously) too long. At least it isn't clear to me that there is so much work needed that people would react with "two years to get this done, we better start right now and consistently work towards it because we might miss the deadline otherwise."

How about six months?

For me overly long deadlines are a signal that "this isn't really that important" as the first reaction by people having to deliver on the deadline will be procrastination and not action A deadline has to create a sense of urgency, not panic, but urgency. Otherwise it is IMHO useless to have a deadline.

Author: > Why two years?

Some experience with decision times in scikit-learn.... :innocent: 
But I am open to optimism, I believe a renewal of the SC is doable in one year: I am scared by the frustration that a deadline of 6 months could generate ... at least for me.
Quick reactions about this PR from all the core-devs might eventually push me to further shorten the deadline... :pray:

Author: > Is it a starting point to be discussed

Yes.

Author: Reduced the transition period to one year... :crossed_fingers: :

Reviewer 4: I (still) believe that people deliver when you have high expectations. More practically, I expect people who agreed to serve in some role for a project (be that maintainer, team lead, club president, steering committee, etc) do so knowing that it will require commitment. It isn't like a honorary title that a university gives out or an award where you don't have to do anything in return for receiving it.

(I also get disappointed because that doesn't happen, but I remain optimistic :D)

> The current members of the Technical Committee [9]_ will ensure the transition
> for a one-years period, starting from the acceptance of this SLEP.
> During the transition period, each new created role among the "Core Contributors" is
> expected to be represented in the Steering Committee by at least one member having this
> role.

Reviewer 8: This is not well-defined, since it doesn't define what the transition really is.

I'm not sure if this clause is necessary. I would suggest something lightweight as:

```suggestion
The Steering Committee will accept members from any of the core contributor teams,
and after this SLEP is accepted, the definition and formation of core teams such as
the triage team and the communication team will go ahead.
```

Reviewer: LGTM. Thank for making it lighter.

Define the Steering Committee as a subset of Core Contributors rather
than a subset of Core Developers.

> The Steering Committee will accept members from any of the core contributor teams,

Reviewer 8: I'm personally not a big fan of having to integrate new members in the SC. I rather have that happen when it happens. Not sure how others feel.

> The Steering Committee will accept members from any of the core contributor teams,

Reviewer 4: IMHO the intention of these two formulations are quite different. For me "will accept" implies that "it is not illegal, but might also never happen, only time will tell", where as "will integrate" implies that "we will do this, the status quo is not enough to comply with the letter of the law". So the choice of this word has a large impact. (My word choice for how I interpret these is overly dramatic, but I couldn't think of a different one.)

The reason this difference matters to me is that the former reminds me of "commitments" that companies or governments make when they have no intentions of implementing any meaningful changes in the near term. The latter implies there will be action in the immediate future. Of course, which of the two this SLEP wants to do is up for discussion/a question of opinion. So neither is right or wrong, but they do imply different things.

> The Steering Committee will accept members from any of the core contributor teams,

Author: Thank you @betatim for expliciting this in a so clear way. I guess you understand why I prefer 'integrate'. No reason to put a deadline if we don't use 'integrate'. In my opinion, this SLEP lose any power of action otherwise: as I have no right to vote I will be happy to remove my name from the authors if this is merged as is.
Thanks for your understanding.

> The Steering Committee will accept members from any of the core contributor teams,

Reviewer 3: If I understand correctly, perhaps this wording is more explicit? With the above wording it seems either way to encourage a 1-1 between SC and Core Developers, whereas this allows a sub-selection.

```suggestion
The Steering Committee shall not discriminate admission on the basis of membership to specific core contributor teams.
```

> The Steering Committee will accept members from any of the core contributor teams,

Reviewer 7: I find the wording of both proposals quite strange, in that I don't know what the tangible meaning of a committee accepting _or_ integrating some people is. Something I understand is processes for nomination and election, which I think is why @thomasjpfan's framing below is compelling.

A wording like:
```suggestion
The Steering Committee shall consist of members from any of the core contributor teams,
```
makes this clear, while nomination processes therefore stand as previous.

I guess the question remains of whether there is a need for affirmative action beyond the _possibility_ of inclusion. I'm not convinced that this is necessary, although I can see why we might perceive a bias towards core developers in the voting process.

> The Steering Committee will accept members from any of the core contributor teams,

Reviewer 3: I'm also happy with @jnothman's wording suggestion

and after this SLEP is accepted, the definition and formation of core teams such as

> the triage team and the communication team will go ahead.

Reviewer 8: This doesn't strictly define them, it's more of a general direction in my mind.

> the triage team and the communication team will go ahead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the triage team and the communication team will go ahead.
```

.. [7]

   SLEP019: Governance Update - Recognizing Contributions Beyond Code
   https://github.com/scikit-learn/enhancement_proposals/pull/74

.. [8]

>    SLEP019: Governance Update - Recognizing Contributions Beyond Code

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   SLEP019: Governance Update - Recognizing Contributions Beyond Code (version II)
```

.. [7]

   SLEP019: Governance Update - Recognizing Contributions Beyond Code
   https://github.com/scikit-learn/enhancement_proposals/pull/74

.. [8]

   scikit-learn Techical Committee

>    https://scikit-learn.org/1.1/governance.html#technical-committee

Author: The Technical committee page should be updated: I'm opening an issue, I believe it should be updated for 1.2 (and the link here updated to 1.2 then)

Reviewer: Otherwise, it can be:
```suggestion
   scikit-learn Techical Committee
   https://scikit-learn.org/stable/governance.html#technical-committee
```

Author: I want to give a snapshot of the TC at the time of the acceptance of the SLEP.
This will probably become https://scikit-learn.org/1.2/governance.html#technical-committee but the link is not existent for now.

Reviewer: It now is!

```suggestion
   scikit-learn Techical Committee
   https://scikit-learn.org/1.2/governance.html#technical-committee
```

.. [9]

   Decision Making Process, scikit-learn Governance and Decision-Making:

>    https://scikit-learn.org/dev/governance.html#decision-making-process

Reviewer: We might also preferably change this to point to the stable version of the documentation.
```suggestion
   https://scikit-learn.org/stable/governance.html#decision-making-process
```
